<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>卷首語</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../cbeta.css" />
</head>
<body>
<div id='body'>

<div class='div-other'><a id='mulu1' />
<p class='h1'>卷首語</p><p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《藏外佛教文獻》每輯的卷首語為聯<span class='corr'>繫</span>編者與讀者的橋樑與介紹本輯主要內容的園地。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">首先談一下什麼叫「藏外佛教文獻」？</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">「藏」，指佛教大藏經。傳統所謂「大藏經」，專指漢文大藏經，包括正藏與續藏，它是我國漢文佛教典籍的總彙。我國的漢文大藏經種類雖多，仍有不少與佛教有關的文獻散佚在藏外。例如：近代以來從梵文、巴利語、藏文、蒙文等各種文字翻譯的佛教典籍；敦煌藏經洞保存的大量佛教典籍；各地圖書館、博物館保存的未為歷代大藏經所收的古代佛教典籍；正史、地方史志、叢書、類書、個人文集中保存的佛教資料；與佛教有關的金石資料；近現代的佛教著作與資料。上述種種均可稱為「藏外佛教文獻」。文獻是文化的主要載體之一，佛教文獻是佛教文化的主要載體之一。所以，已經入藏的典籍固然重要，散佚在藏外的文獻也不容忽視，必須認真加以整理。應該說明的是，歷代正藏，均經多次校勘，一般質量較高；而續藏所收典籍，往往有較大隨意性，且缺乏版本的精選與校勘，頗有文字錯訛等情。因此，有的典籍雖然已經為某續藏所收，但如果新發現的傳本比已入藏本更加完善，則也應該成為整理的對象。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">現在尚流傳於世界、且自成體系的佛教大藏經主要有三種：南傳巴利語三藏；漢文大藏經；藏文甘殊爾、丹殊爾。梵文佛典雖仍有留存，且近年來不斷有新的梵文佛典被發現，但大抵均為單部殘頁。雖然它的研究價值不能低估，但畢竟已不足成為完整的大藏。另外，中國還保存有完整的傣文大藏經、蒙文大藏經、滿文大藏經、出土不少殘缺不全的西夏文大藏經，但上述佛藏基本是從前述三種主要的佛藏轉譯的。因此，巴利語三藏、漢文大藏經及藏文甘殊爾、丹殊爾等三種佛藏在佛教研究中的意義和價值是不言自明的。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">就上述三種主要的佛藏而言，漢文大藏經所收經籍的數量最多，其經籍所涉及的時代跨度最大，地區涵蓋面最廣，所包容的佛教派別也最多。因此，巴利語及藏文佛藏固然有其不可替代的獨特的研究價值，漢文大藏經的價值顯然更值得人們重視。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">近代以來，西方的佛教學者大抵沿著巴利語佛典——梵文佛典——藏文佛典這麼一條路線來展開佛教研究，從事漢文佛典研究的人相對來說較少，這種情況與漢文佛典本身的價值相比很不相稱。所以形成這麼一種局面，除了其它種種原因外，語言的障礙及對漢文大藏經及其價值不甚了解，大約也是重要因素。現在，有的學者已開始注意到這一問題，中外都有學者在呼籲並從事漢文佛典的英譯工作。我深信，更多的人會越來越認識到漢文佛典的重要價值，從而對它展開深入的研究，而漢文大藏經也會在這一過程中，為人類文化的重建與發展作出它應有的貢獻。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">如果我們把目前還散佚在藏外的佛教文獻也儘量收集、整理出來，並收歸入藏，則漢文大藏經將對佛教的發展與研究、對人類文化作出更大的貢獻。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">這就是《藏外佛教文獻》的宗旨。願意與所有關心此事的人士共勉。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">其次介紹《藏外佛教文獻》第一輯的主要內容。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">第一輯的「敦煌禪籍」專欄刊登了四篇新發現的敦煌禪文獻：</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《天竺國菩提達摩禪師論》、《禪策問答》、《息諍論》依次抄寫在同一敦煌寫卷上。其中《禪策問答》通過三十道問答，論述了修禪的許多具體問題；《息諍論》則著重說明真如佛性具在心中，故而解不外憑，反對祇知追求經論，諍論道理的學風。它們均係最新發現並首次公佈。我認為它們都是北宗禪的著作，很可能屬於義福一系。讀者可以通過它們進一步增加對北宗禪的了解。《天竺國菩提達摩禪師論》託名禪宗初祖達摩，論述禪門之法。刊佈在這裡的是一個新發現的寫本，與保存在法國伯希和敦煌特藏中的同名異本相比，它的結尾部分多出一段，從而給人們帶來一些新的信息。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">第一輯的「密教典籍」專欄刊登印度密教文獻一篇，為《八種粗重犯墮》。該文獻作者不詳，託名馬鳴著，共論述密教戒律八條。該文獻係在西夏故地發現，對研究西夏佛教有一定的價值。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">第一輯的「三藏註疏」專欄刊登經律論疏各一篇：</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《天請問經疏》是唐代著名僧人文軌的作品。《大正藏》收入了該疏的一個殘本，這裡刊佈的則是一個完整的校訂本。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《行事鈔中分門圖錄》是對唐釋道宣《四分律行事鈔》的科分，原卷採用圖示式，故名。刊佈時限於條件，改為提綱式。該文獻亦為最新發現與首次刊佈。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《阿毗達磨俱舍論實義疏》的作者安慧是印度佛教著名的「十大論師」之一。該疏主要反駁眾賢《順正理論》對世親《俱舍論》的批評，是反映六世紀上半葉印度佛教的重要著作。這部著作何時、由何人譯為漢文，在我國經錄中沒有記載。《大正藏》收入了依據法國伯希和特藏錄文的節抄本，這裡刊佈的則是該疏卷三的全文。這個寫本在敦煌發現後曾經一度流散民間，後為北京圖書館收藏。最近我們在北圖另行收藏的敦煌遺書殘片中發現了這個民間流散本缺失的卷首部分，使該卷得以復原，實為幸事。敦煌遺書中有該《實義疏》的回鶻文譯本，兩者可以參照。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">第一輯的「疑偽經」專欄刊佈了敦煌疑偽經八篇。這些疑偽經大多為首次公佈。有些以前雖然也曾有人發表，但這次均根據諸種寫本重新校勘，或改正錯誤，或補正殘缺。應該說明，所謂「疑偽經」是一個很複雜的概念，其中不少經典並非如人們所想<span class='corr'>像</span>的是中國人的作品。這個問題，需要在今後作專題論述。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《佛為心王菩薩說頭陀經》是一部對禪宗有著重大影響的經典，關於它的作者及產生年代目前均不清楚。以前人們已經知道它有兩個漢文殘本與一個粟特文殘本，兩種文字的寫本內容互不相同。本輯刊佈的則是漢文全本，使得粟特文本有了一個可靠的參照本。漢文全本並附有註疏。可以預見，本文獻的刊佈，不但對禪宗研究，而且對粟特文研究，均會產生積極的作用。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《佛說孝順子修行成佛經》與《最妙勝定經》被傳統經錄稱為疑偽經，但人們可以從本輯刊佈的經文看到，它們實際都是域外傳入，而非中國人撰述。《水月觀音經》反映了中國佛教的觀音崇拜；《金剛經纂》反映了中國佛教的經典崇拜；《大方廣華嚴十惡品經》則是南北朝中國佛教斷肉食素運動的產物。由於疑偽經多在民間流傳，缺乏整理，故容易產生諸種異本。本輯刊佈的《天公經》有三種異本、《佛母經》有四種異本，就反映了這方面的情況。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">第一輯的「研究論文」專欄發表論文一篇：</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《關於〈禪藏〉與敦煌禪籍的若干問題》認為唐宗密的確編輯過《禪藏》。在對《禪藏》進行考察與對敦煌禪籍現狀進行分析之後，文章指出宗密《禪藏》的相當一部分被保存在敦煌禪籍中，根據敦煌禪籍復原《禪藏》是可能的，這必將揭開禪宗研究的新篇章。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">最後是幾點希望。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《藏外佛教文獻》是一枝剛剛抽條的幼芽，迫切希望得到如下各種支持：</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">衷心希望讀者對我們的文獻整理工作，包括篇目的確定、底校本的選擇、辨字錄文、校勘註記、分段標點、題解說明等各個方面，提出認真的批評，以把藏外佛教文獻的整理工作做得更好。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">藏外佛教文獻散佚在各地，收集極為不易。衷心希望各界人士能夠提供各種尚未入藏的佛教文獻的信息與資料，無論片紙隻字，均不勝感謝。凡提供的底校本被採用者，一律刊佈功德芳名，並致酬示謝。如有投稿者，更無任歡迎。詳見《<span class='corr'>徵</span>稿啟事》。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《藏外佛教文獻》沒有經濟來源，第一輯賴中國佛教文化研究所與香港志蓮淨苑的支持，得以起步，不勝感荷。甚望諸方有識之士慨施淨財，共襄厥業。</p>
<p class="byline">方廣錩</p><p class="byline">一九九五年十月十日</p></div>
<div class='div-other'><a id='mulu2' />
<p class='h1'>Foreword</p><p>The foreword to each volume of Buddhist Texts Not Contained in the Tripitaka acts as a bridge between the editors and the readers and introduces the readers to the main contents of the respective volume.</p>
<p>Let us first of all talk about what it means by Buddhist Texts Not Contained in the Tripitaka.</p>
<p>The &quot;Collection&quot; means the Great Collection of the <span class='corr'>Scriptures</span> of Buddhism (Fojiao Dazangjing, Tripitaka). What traditionally is called &quot;Dazangjing&quot; means specifically the Chinese Tripitaka, including the Main Collection (Zheng Zang) and the Supplementary Collection (Xu Zang). It constitutes the comprehensive compilation of Buddhist texts in Chinese. Although there are many kinds of Chinese Tripitaka in our country, there still are many texts which have something to do with Buddhism. They are found elsewhere and are outside the Tripitaka. Here we find, for example: all kinds of Buddhist scriptures translated in modern times from Sanskrit, Pali, Tibetan, Mongolian, etc.; a great amount of Buddhist texts from the Dunhuang Scripture Cave; ancient Buddhist texts which are kept in various libraries and museums and have not yet been included in the Tripitakas of the various eras; Buddhist materials preserved in dynastic histories, local <span class='corr'>gazetteers</span>, classified reference books and collected works of individual persons; materials on stone and bronze inscriptions; Buddhist works and materials of recent dates. All the above-mentioned works can be called Buddhist Texts Not Contained in the Tripitaka. Literature is one of the main carriers of culture, and Buddhist literature is one of the main carriers of Buddhist culture. The texts already contained in the collections are, of course, very important; however, also the literary contributions not yet contained in the Tripitaka should not be overlooked, but must be carefully edited. What has to be stated clearly is, that after the often repeated critical work applied to them, the quality of the texts in the Main Collection of the various eras is generally rather high; on the contrary, works included in the Supplementary Collection are often of a rather arbitrary nature, they lack a careful selection and text critical work, and often they have wrong characters. Therefore, although some texts have already been included in some supplementary collections, if the quality of newly discovered texts is higher than that of texts already contained in the Tripitaka, this should also be an objective of our editorial work.</p>
<p>There are now three main current versions of the Buddhist Canon: the Pali Canon of the southern tradition, the Chinese version of the Tripitaka, and the Tibetan Kanjur and Tanjur. Some Sanskrit Buddhist texts are extant, and recently there are constant new discoveries of Sanskrit texts, but they are in general mutilated leaves of particular units. Although their value for research cannot be underestimated, they do not amount to a complete Tripitaka. Furthermore, in China there still are complete Tripitakas in the Dai language, in Mongolian, in Manchu, and many incomplete parts of the Tripitaka in the Tangut language which have been unearthed. However, the above-mentioned Buddhist collections are basically all derived and translated from the before-mentioned three main versions of the Buddhist collections. The meaning and value for Buddhist research of the Pali Tripitaka, the Chinese versions of the Tripitaka and the Tibetan Kanjur and Tanjur are therefore self-evident.</p>
<p>Talking only about the above-mentioned three main collections of the Buddhist scriptures, the Chinese Tripitaka <span class='corr'>contained</span> the greatest number of scriptures, the extent of time to which the texts belong is the longest, the territory they cover is the vastest, the Buddhist schools they represent are the most. Therefore, although the Pali Canon and the Tibetan Buddhist Canon retain their irreplaceable and unique value for research, the Chinese version of the Tripitaka evidently deserves men&#39;s even more attention.</p>
<p>In modern times, developing their Buddhist research, Buddhist scholars in the West generally focus their attention on a sequence of Pali Canon — Sanskrit Buddhist texts — Tibetan Buddhist texts. Scholars devoted to research of Chinese Buddhist texts are relatively few. Such a situation, compared with the value of the Chinese Buddhist texts themselves, is rather unbalanced. The reason for such a state, apart from many other causes, might be the obstacle of the language and lack of understanding for the Chinese Tripitaka and of its value. Now many scholars have begun to pay attention to this problem, and there are many Chinese and foreign scholars who call for and devote themselves to the translation of Chinese Buddhist texts into English. I am deeply convinced that many more people will come to an ever deeper understanding of the value of the Chinese Buddhist texts and develop penetrating research into them. And the Chinese Tripitaka will in this process offer its due contribution to the reconstruction and development of mankind&#39;s culture.</p>
<p>If we endeavour to collect and edit, as far as possible, the literary contributions of Buddhism which still are lying scattered outside the collection of Buddhist scriptures, and if we add them to the collection, the Chinese Tripitaka will in future offer an even much greater contribution to the development and research of Buddhism and to the culture of mankind.</p>
<p>This, then, is the goal of Buddhist Texts Not Contained in the Tripitaka. Let us editors and all who are concerned with this matter encourage each other in our endeavours.</p>
<p>Next let me introduce the main contents of the first number of Buddhist Texts Not Contained in the Tripitaka.</p>
<p>The column &quot;Chan Texts from Dunhuang&quot; of the first number brings four newly discovered Chan texts from Dunhuang: Tianzhuguo Putidamo Chanshi Lun, Chance Wenda, and Xizheng Lun are copied in sequence on one roll of Dunhuang writings. The Chance Wenda explains through thirty questions and answers many concrete questions of Chan practice; Xizheng Lun explains emphatically that the true Buddhata is within the mind, and therefore cannot be understood as taking recourse to what is external to it; it is opposed to a style of study which only knows how to seek great knowledge of and critical inquisition into truth. These texts have all been discovered quite recently and are being published for the first time. I think that they are all works of the Northern Chan School, most probably in the line of Yi Fu. Through them the reader can advance in his understanding of the Northern Chan School. Under the name of Dharma, the first patriarch of the Chan School, the Tianzhuguo Putidamo Chanshi Lun discusses the method of the Chan School. What is published here is a newly discovered manuscript; compared with another book of the same name in Pelliot&#39;s special collection of Dunhuang preserved in France, its ending has another paragraph and gives us some more new information.</p>
<p>The column &quot;Esoteric Texts&quot; of the first number brings a text from the Indian Esoteric Buddhism, the Ba Zhong Cu Zhong Fan Duo. The author of this text is unknown, it is, however, ascribed to Ashvagosha. It discusses eight points of the Vinaya of Esoteric Buddhism. The text belongs to the ones discovered in the old sites (Heicheng) of Xixia and has its value for the study of Tangut Buddhism.</p>
<p>The section &quot;Commentaries on the Tripitaka&quot; brings a text each from commentaries to the sutras and the vinayas:</p>
<p>Tian Qing Wen Jing Shu is a work by the famous Tang monk Wengui. The Taisho Daizokyo has included a mutilated copy of this commentary. Here we publish a complete and corrected copy.</p>
<p>Xing Shi Chao Zhong Fen Men Tu Lu is an outline for the Si Fen Lu Xing Shi Chao of the Tang monk Shi Daoxuan. The original book had used graphical representations, which explains the name. Their publication being hampered by given conditions, it is changed to the form of an outline.</p>
<p>Anhui, the author of A Pi Da Mo Ju She Lun Shi Yi Shu, is one of the famous &quot;ten great shastra masters&quot; of Indian Buddhism. In the main it is a refutation of the criticism of Samghabhadra in his Shun Zheng Li Lun against Vasubandhu&#39;s Abhidharma Kosa Sastra and reflects a main work of Indian Buddhism of the second half of the 6th century. There is no mention in the sutra catalogues of our country on the time when this work was written or who translated it into Chinese. Taisho Daizokyo has included a partial copy based upon Pelliot&#39;s special collection. What we publish here is the complete third volume of the said commentary. The present manuscript had wandered around among people for a while since its discovery in Dunhuang is finally kept in the Beijing Library. When lately we checked another bunch of book fragments from Dunhuang at the Beijing Library, we discovered the first missing part of this book, which enabled us to reconstruct the original, a really lucky event. Among the extant Dunhuang books there is a Uighur version of this Shi Yi Shu, so that the two can be compared.</p>
<p>In the section &quot;Doubtful and Spurious Works&quot; of the first number are published eight doubtful and spurious works from Dunhuang. Most of these doubtful and spurious works are published for the first time. Although some had been published earlier by somebody, this time they all have been critically revised according to the various kinds of manuscripts, wrong characters have been emended or lacking parts added. We must say that &quot;Doubtful and Spurious Sutras&quot; is a very complicated concept. Many among them are no products of Chinese as one might imagine. This question later on has to become the subject of a special debate.</p>
<p>Fo Wei Xin Wang Pu Sa Shuo Tou Tuo Jing is a work which has had great influence on the Chan School. At the moment there is no information on its author or the time of its composition. Earlier we knew already that there were two mutilated Chinese and one mutilated Sogdian copy, and that the contents of the manuscripts in the two languages did not correspond to each other. The publication in the present number is a complete Chinese version which allows the Sogdian version to have a reliable work for comparison. The Chinese copy has notes and commentary added. It can be expected that the publication of the present text will be of great use not only for the study of the Chan School, but also for study of Soghdian.</p>
<p>Fo Shuo Xiao Shun Zi Xiu Xing Cheng Fo Jing and Zui Miao Sheng Ding Jing are classified as doubtful and spurious sutras by the traditional sutra catalogues. But from the texts published in the present number people will see that they all have been brought into China from outside and have not been written by Chinese. Shui Yue Guan Yin Jing reflects the worship of Guanyin in Chinese Buddhism; Jing Gang Jing Zuan reflects the worship of sutras in Chinese Buddhism; the Da Fang Guang Hua Yan Shi E Pin Jing is a product of the vegetarian movement of Chinese Buddhism during the time of the Northern and Southern Dynasties. Since doubtful and spurious works have mostly circulated among the people and there was no authoritative editing, it was easy for various different versions to appear. The Tian Gong Jing which we publish here has three different versions, the Fo Mu Jing has four different versions, which reflects the situation in this regard.</p>
<p>The section &quot;Research Papers&quot; brings one articles:</p>
<p>The article &quot;Some Problems Concerning the Chan Zang and the Chan Writings from Dunhuang&quot; assumes that the Chan Zang has effectively been composed by the Tang monk Zongmi. After an inquisition into the Chan Zang and an analysis of the present condition of the Dunhuang Chan writings the article points out that considerable part of Zongmi&#39;s Chan Zang has been preserved in the Chan writings of Dunhuang and that it is possible to reconstruct the Chan Zang according to the Chan Writings of Dunhuang. This will certainly open a new chapter in our research into Chan Buddhism.</p>
<p>Finally some desiderata. Buddhist Texts Not Contained in the Tripitaka is a tender sprout which has just sprung up and urgently hopes to find such support as follows:</p>
<p>We earnestly hope that the readers will voice honest criticism concerning our editorial work, including the definition of chapter headings, the choice of the master copies, discussion of characters, notes on textual criticism, segmentation and punctuation, explanatory notes on the background of the works, and other questions. In this way the work of Buddhist texts not included in the Tripitaka will be done in an even better way.</p>
<p>Buddhist works not included in the Tripitaka are scattered everywhere, and it is extremely difficult to collect them. We earnestly hope that people everywhere will come up with information and material on Buddhist texts which are not yet included in the Tripitaka; we will be deeply grateful even for just a <span class='corr'>short</span> note. Anyone who contributes a master copy to be used will be mentioned by name and receive our deepest thanks. The sincerest thanks will go to anybody who will submit an article for publication. For details see Guidelines on Submitting Articles.</p>
<p>Buddhist Texts Not Included in the Tripitaka has no financial resources of its own. We are very grateful to the Institute of Chinese Buddhist Culture and the Zhi Lian Jing Yuan from Hong Kong for their kind support to the publication of this very first book. We hope that all men of insight could generously fund the <span class='corr'>publication</span> of the next number of the same book.</p>
<p class="byline">Fang Guangchang</p><p class="byline">10 October 1995</p></div>
<div class='div-other'><a id='mulu3' />
<p class='h1'>卷首の語り</p><p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《藏外佛教文獻》の一輯每に「卷首の語り」というのは、編者が讀者と連絡をとるための橋渡しであり、本輯の主な內容を紹介する本據でもある。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">先ず、「藏外佛教文獻」とは何であるかについて話しておく。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">「藏」は佛教の大藏經を指すことである。傳統の上から「大藏經」と呼ばれたものは、專ら漢文大藏經、中には正藏と續藏も含めていることを指して言うのであり、それは我が國の漢文佛教文獻の總攬てあつた。漢文大藏經の種類が多くと雖も佛教にかかわる文獻が散佚して、「大藏經」に收まらないものが少なくない。例えば、近代以來、サンスクリツト、パ—リ、チベツト、モンコル文など、原文から翻譯された大量の佛教典籍、各地の圖書館．博物館が保存されている古代の佛教典籍、正史．地方史志．叢書．類書．個人文集に保存された佛教典籍、佛教に關連する金石資料、近現代の佛教著作と資料など、これらのものが未だに歷代の大藏經の中を入れていないものがたくさんあり、これら種種樣樣なものはすべて「藏外佛教文獻」と稱すべきである。文獻なるものは文化の主な載せる機關の一つであり、佛教文獻も佛教文化の主な載せる機關の一つである。すでに藏經にはいる典籍は固より重要だが、散逸して藏經以外にある文獻も忽視するわけにはいかない。真劍に整理を加える必要がある。說明すべきことは、歷代の正藏は悉く幾度も校訂をへて、概して質がより高いが、續藏の收まるところの典籍は往往にしてより強い隨意的で、且つ版本の精選と校訂とに欠けたもので、文字の誤謬などもある。そこで、ある典籍がある續藏にとりいれられたど雖も、もし新發現の傳本のほうが藏經本に比べて、更に完璧だとすれば、やつぱり整理の對像となるわけである。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">現在なお世界に流傳され、且つ自ら體系となる主な佛教大藏經は三種あり、即ち南傳パ—リ三藏、漢文大藏經、チベツトのガンスウ—ルとダンスウ—ルはそれである。サンスクリツトの佛典は殘存されるものがあり、且つ近年以來、引續きサンスクリツトの佛典が見附けられたが、たいてい皆單部あるいは殘葉で、その研究價值が過小視してはいけないが、畢竟するに完璧の大藏となることは足ない。そして、中國はまた完全な傣文の大藏經、モンコル文の大藏經、滿洲文の大藏經、數少なからず出土した西夏文大藏經などを保存しており、もつとも上述した佛藏は主に前述した三類主要な佛藏より轉譯したものであるから、パ—リ三藏、漢文大藏經、チベツトのガンスウ—ルとダンスウ—ルなどの三種類の佛藏は佛教研究での意義と價值が言わなくても明らかである。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">上述の三種類主な佛藏について言うと、漢文大藏經が收錄された經典の數が最も多く、その經籍が時代を及ぼすところの跨る間隔も最も長く、地區を包括する幅も最も廣く、そのうえ包括する佛教派別も最も多いわけである。從つて、パ—リ及チベツトの佛藏は固より掛替できない獨特な研究價值を持つているけれども、漢文大藏經は尚更人人の重視に值することも明らかである。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">近年以來、西方の佛教學者が大抵パ—リの佛典、サンスクリツトの佛典、チベツトの佛典というコ—スを沿つて研究をくりひろげており、專ら漢文佛典研究にたずさわる人が相對的に數は少ない。このような實狀では漢文佛典そのものの價值に比べて極めてふさわしくない。こうした局面を致すのは別の諸諸な原因を除く外、言葉の妨げ並び漢文大藏經とその價值に對してはあまりはつきりしないことも恐らく重要な因素であろう。今は、この問題についてある學者が注意しはじめ、中國も外國も漢文佛典の英譯に從事してくるように呼びかけしていました。更により多くの人がますます漢文佛典の重要價值を認識し、從つてそれに深く研究をくりひろげ、漢文大藏經もきつとこの過程を通じて人類文化の創り直すこととその發展にあり得べき貢獻を作り出すこと深く信じております。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">さしあたりもしも私たちができ得る限り散逸した藏外にある佛教文獻をかき集めて整理を加え、そして大藏經にとりいれられるべきものを大藏經に收まらせたら、漢文大藏經は將に佛教の發展と研究、そして、人類文化の發展には、更に大いに役割を果すことになると思う。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">これは、《藏外佛教文獻》の目的であり、冀くはこのことに關心を持つ方と勵みあつて努力したいと願い申上げます。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">其の次、《藏外佛教文獻》第一輯の主要內容を紹介します。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">第一輯の「敦煌禪籍」の專欄には敦煌禪文獻四篇の新發現したものを刊行した。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《天竺國菩提達摩禪師論》、《禪策問答》、《息諍論》などが順番に同じの敦煌寫卷の上にうつした。中の《禪策問答》が三十題の問答を通じて禪の修持についての數多くの具體的問題を論述し、《息諍論》では真如佛性は俱く心中にある故、外へ憑れば理解できず、經論ばかりを目ざして理論だけを追求しようとする諍論の學風には反對の立場に立つ。これらは皆最新の發現であり、初めての刊行である。私がこれみな北宗禪の著作で義福の系統するものの可能性が多いと思う。讀者はこれらを通じて北宗禪に對する了解を一步深められるに違いないと思う。《天竺國菩提達摩禪師論》は禪宗の初祖達摩の名を托して禪門の法を論した。ここに刊佈したものは、一つに新發現の寫本であり、フランスのペリオ敦煌本にある同名異本に比べて、終卷部分には一段の餘裕が出てくるので人人に新しい消息をもたらしてきたのである。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">第一輯の「密教典籍」の專欄に刊佈された印度密教文獻一篇は《八種粗重犯墮》である。文獻の作者は詳しからず馬鳴という名を托して書いたものをあわせて、密教戒律の八條を論述した。當文獻は西夏文獻であるので、西夏佛教を研究するのにすいぶん價值あるものと認められる。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">第一輯の「三藏註疏」專欄には經律論疏各各一篇を刊行した。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《天請問經疏》は唐代名僧文軌の作品で、《大正藏》には當疏の一殘本が編入され、ここに刊佈したものは完全な校訂本の一本である。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《行事鈔中分門圖錄》は唐代釋道宣《四分律行事鈔》の科分で、原卷は圖で示す格式を採用する故、そう名付けた。刊行した當時は條件に限られ、要點をとり舉げ綱領式にした。この文獻も最新の發現と初めての刊行である。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《阿毗達磨俱舍論實義疏》の作者安慧が印度著名な「十大論師」の一人で、當疏は主に眾賢が《順正理論》を持つて世親の《俱舍論》を批判することに對する反駁であり、六世紀前半の印度佛教を反映する重要な著作であつた。いつ、だれによつて漢文に譯されたのが、我が國の經錄の中に記錄していなかつた。《大正藏》ではペりオ敦煌本にある當疏の節錄本を揭載していたが、ここに刊行するのが當疏の卷三の全文である。敦煌文獻の中にまだ當疏のウイグル文譯本があり、兩者を參照すれば良い。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">第一輯の「疑偽經」專欄には敦煌疑偽經八篇を發表。これらの疑偽經は初めて發表したものが多く。以前もう發表したものもあるが、今回は皆諸諸の寫本の新たな校訂によるもの、誤謬を正したり、殘缺を補つたりした。申すべきことは、所謂「疑偽經」なるものは、その概念が複雜で、就中、かなりの經典が決して人人の想<span class='corr'>像</span>したような中國人の作品ではない。今後の專著でこの問題を論述する必要がある。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《佛為心王菩薩說頭陀經》は禪宗に對して重大な影響を有する經典であるが、作者と著作の作成年代が尚はつきりしない。漢文殘本殘本二點とソグト殘本一點があるということはよく知られていつたが、今度，新しい發現の三點の全本をあわせて、完全の校訂本を發表した。校訂本はソグト本をして一つの當になる參照本とならしめ、且つ全本に註疏もつけてある。當文獻の開行は予想すべく、禪宗研究にだけでなく、ソグト文研究に對しても積極的影響をもたらすのである。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《佛說孝順子修行成佛經》と《最妙勝定經》が傳統的經錄に疑偽經と呼ばれているものであるが、人人は本輯の經文からも見られるように、それらもみな域外の傳入で中國人の撰述ではない。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《水月觀音經》は中國佛教の觀音に對する崇拜を反映するものであり、《金剛經纂》は中國佛教の經典崇拜を反映する。《大方廣華嚴十惡品經》では南北朝時代における中國佛教禁肉食素運動の產物である。疑偽經はたいてい民間で流傳したもの、整理に欠缺するので、諸諸の異本が出やすいこと。本輯で刊行した《天公經》は三種類の異本あり、《佛母經》は四種類の異本がある。これなどはこの方面の實情の反映である。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">第一輯の「研究論文」專欄には論文一篇を發表した。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《〈禪藏〉と敦煌禪籍についての若干問題》では唐の宗密が確かに《禪藏》を編集したことがある。《禪藏》を考察し、また敦煌禪籍の現狀に對して分析を加えた後、文章は更に宗密の《禪宗》はかなりの部分が敦煌禪籍の中に保存されており、敦煌禪籍をふまえて《禪藏》を復元しても可能であると認める。これは新しい禪宗研究の篇章を世に揭示されることに違いない。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">最後には幾點の望みである。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《藏外佛教文獻》は枝に萌生えばかりの芽のようなもので、以下のいろいろ支持を得たいのが緊迫である。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">皆樣には、われわれ文獻整理や篇目の確定を含め、底校訂本の選擇、字をわきまえ、錄文、校訂と註記、段落を分け、句讀を切ること乃至題解と說明など、各方面にわたつて真劍に批評を作つてもらいたい。よつて藏外の佛教文獻の整理をよくよくなし遂げられるよう願い申上げる。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">藏外佛教文獻は各地に散逸した故、かき集めることも頗る難事となる。冀くは各界の皆樣、これから諸諸のまだに佛教文獻に編入していない消息や資料など片紙隻字であつも良い。どうか提供できるよう誠に感謝にたえない。底本を提供して頂き採用されていつた方には一律に功德と芳名を刊佈し、お禮も差し上げて感謝の意を表する。投稿してくれる者に對して何よりも歡迎である。「投稿約束御中」に詳しく參考。</p>
<p style="margin-left:0em;text-indent:2em">《藏外佛教文獻》は收入の源がない。第一輯は、中國佛教文化研究所と香港の志蓮淨苑の御支持を得てこそ步きはじめ、感謝して堪えない。各方面有識の士慨然と淨財を施し、共に厥の業を襄けられますようお禮を申上げる。</p>
<p class="byline">方廣錩</p><p class="byline">1995年10月10日</p></div>
</div><!-- end of div[@id='body'] -->
</body></html>